                            
     Standard Upper Ontology Development Guidelines
                     Version 1.0 D3
             Status: Stage 2: Draft Material
                  Editor: Matthew West

1.   Introduction
  
  1.1. Purpose
The purpose of this document is to support the purpose of
the Standard Upper Ontology Group, as stated in the
Project Authorisation Request [1] by providing principles
and lightweight procedures and templates to enable the
efficient and effective development of deliverables for
the Standard Upper Ontology Group.
  
  1.2. Target Audience
The target audience for this document is the participants
in the Standard Upper Ontology Group, noting that they
can come from a wide range of backgrounds with a wide
range of (and lack of) knowledge and experience.
  
  1.3. Scope
(editorial note: Inserted in this version)
This document applies to all deliverables of the Standard
Upper Ontology Workgroup that require approval by the
Standard Upper Ontology Workgroup.
This includes:
-    Ontologies developed under the Standard Upper
     Ontology Workgroup,
-    This document.
This excludes:
-    Deliverables of other standards bodies,
-    Discussions on the Standard Upper Ontology e-mail
lists.

2.   Process
  
  2.1. Stage 1 - Activity Approval
A proposal shall be submitted as a motion to the Standard
Upper Ontology Group (SUO) defining the objectives of a
Work Programme and include an outline of the deliverables
of the Work Programme. The motion shall also include the
nomination of a Project Manager for the Work Programme.
The motion may include reference to initial material, or
deliverable material for any later stages of the process.
The motion may include the nomination of additional roles
within the work programme, e.g. deliverable editor.
If the motion is passed the Work Programme becomes a
recognised part of the Standard Upper Ontology activity.
  
  2.2. Stage 2 - Draft Material Development
Draft Material may be developed towards or in support of
the project deliverables. This may be circulated for
comment at the discretion of the Project Manager. No
formal vote on this Draft Material is taken, but
interested parties can raise formal issues against it. It
is good practice to develop and maintain a formal issues
log, but at this stage it is not required.
Formal issues shall be raised using the pro-forma in
Annex A, and sent to the SUO list. The formal issue
resolution process is defined below in Clause 3.
  
  2.3. Stage 3 - Draft Standard Proposal
When the project is satisfied that they have the material
in a form that constitutes a technically complete
Standard, they may propose it as a Draft Standard. A
formal vote is taken. The following responses are
allowed:
-    Abstain
-    Yes
-    Yes with comments
-    No with comments
Comments are made as formal issues raised as described in
Section 3.
"Yes with comments" does not require the formal issues
raised to be resolved before the document is accepted as
a Standard. This might be appropriate when there are
editorial issues, or perhaps minor technical issues. "No
with comments" means that the document is not considered
fit for purpose as a standard, i.e. there are major
technical issues that need to be resolved. It does not
mean that the voter does not support the intent of the
standard. That is decided when the Work Programme is
approved.
Following the result of the vote, if the majority of
those voting, vote in favour, the document may pass to
the next stage.
  
  2.4. Stage 4 - Standard Proposal
The project should attempt to resolve any formal issues
raised as a result of the Draft Standard ballot and then
when the Project Leader is satisfied that as many formal
issues as possible have been resolved, then the document
can be submitted for vote as a Standard.
The voting is as for a Draft Standard. The standard is
passed if a majority vote for it, but in the event that
there are any "no with comments" votes, the Project
Leader should consider resolving the formal issues and
resubmitting the document for a further vote.
  
  2.5. Stage 5 - Revision
A Standard may have formal issues raised against it. A
log of these formal issues shall be maintained by the SUO
Chair. A Project to resolve one or more formal issues
against a Standard may be proposed.

3.   Formal Issue Resolution Process
To be valid, a formal issue shall identify a defect in
the deliverable of the Standard Upper Ontology Group that
detracts from the deliverable meeting its stated purpose.
Where the deliverable is a document, examples of defects
include:
-    a spelling or grammar error,
-    an untrue statement,
-    an unclear, ambiguous or misleading statement,
-    something missing that is necessary.
(editorial note: changed in this version.)
Anyone may raise a formal issue against a Standard Upper
Ontology Working Group deliverable.
A formal issue has an importance level that is one of the
following values:
Editorial      A defect that does not affect the
               technical performance of the document and
               does not affect its comprehension.
               Examples include spelling, grammar, or
               layout.
Minor Technical     A defect that is technical in nature,
               but is easy to fix. Examples include
               errors in construction of formal language
               statements.
Major Technical     A defect where the scale and impact
               of the defect may require significant
               thought and work. Examples include axioms
               stated in such a way that they do not have
               the intended effect, and missing material.
The project shall maintain a log of formal issues raised
against the deliverable for a deliverable that has
reached Draft Standard level or beyond. The formal issue
log shall be publicly available.
A formal issue is resolved when the project and the issue
raiser agree that it is.
The status of a formal issue has one of the following
values:
Raised         The formal issue has been raised, but the
               project has not yet responded to the
               formal issue.
Accepted       The formal issue has been accepted as
               valid by the project, but no resolution
               has been identified and agreed with the
               formal issue raiser.
Rejected       The formal issue has not been accepted by
               the Project. A reason must be given.
Withdrawn      The formal issue has been withdrawn by the
               formal issue raiser.
Resolved       The resolution to the formal issue has
               been agreed in principle by the formal
               issue raiser and the project. The
               resolution is documented in the formal
               issue log, but has not yet been reflected
               in the document.
Completed      The resolution of the formal issue is
               reflected in the document to which it
               refers.
A formal issue is considered outstanding unless it is
either completed or withdrawn.

4.   Normative References
(editorial note: added in this version)
[1]  Project Authorisation Request for P1600.1, IEEE-SA,
  2000 available from the internet 2003-11-19
  http://suo.ieee.org/PAR.pdf

5.   Bibliography
                            
                         Annex 1
                            
                 Definitions (Normative)
(editorial note: added in this version)
This annex provides definitions of terms that are
important to this document or are used in a special or
restricted sense in this document. The definitions given
are those that shall be used in interpreting this
document.
Definitions are given as phrases that can be substituted
for the term defined. The definitions are therefore not
sentences, and do not start with a capital letter and
definite or indefinite article or end with a full stop.

Conformance
agreeing or corresponding in character or qualities
  Note: Taken from the Oxford English Dictionary
        definition for congruous.

Defect
cause of failure of a deliverable to meet its purpose

Definition
precise statement of the essential nature of some thing
  Note: Taken from the Oxford English Dictionary.

Deliverable
formal product of an approved Standard Upper Ontology
Workgroup project

Example
typical instance that illustrates a concept
  Note: Adapted from the Oxford English Dictionary.

Formal Issue
documentation of a defect identified in a deliverable of
the Standard Upper Ontology Workgroup

Informative
documentation that improves understanding, but to which
conformance is not required

Normative
Documentation that sets out a standard or norm to which
conformance may be required

Principle
general rule or law adopted as a guide to action
  Note: Taken from the Oxford English Dictionary.

Purpose
intended function

Target Audience
those to whom the document is addressed and who need to
understand it

Term
word or group of words expressing a notion
  Note: Taken from the Oxford English Dictionary.
                            
                         Annex 2
                            
           Formal issue Pro Forma (Normative)
(editorial note: initial text added in this version)
This annex defines the form that shall be used to
document formal issues. The issue raiser shall complete
at least the following fields on submitting the issue:
-    Formal issue raiser
-    Date Raised
-    Formal issue level
-    Deliverable
-    Clause
-    Title (of the issue)
-    Formal issue
The issue raiser may optionally include a Proposed
Resolution.
The Project Leader shall complete the following fields:
-    Issue No
-    Discussion (that leads the resolution of the issue)
-    Agreed Resolution
-    Completion Date, which is the date the resolution is
implemented in the deliverable
Issue No:
Formal issue Raiser:
Date Raised:
Status:
Formal issue level:
Deliverable:
Clause:
Title:
Formal issue:

Proposed Resolution (optional):

Discussion:

Agreed Resolution (project and formal issue raiser):

Completion Date:
                            
                         Annex 3
                            
            Document Requirements (Normative)
