                             
Standard Upper Ontology Working Group Development Guidelines
                       Version 1.0 D5
               Status: Stage 2: Draft Material
                      Date: 2003-12-08
                    Editor: Matthew West
Copyright © 2003 by the Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers, Inc.
Three Park Avenue
New York, NY 10016-5997, USA
All rights reserved.
This  document  is an unapproved draft of  a  proposed  IEEE
Standard Working Group procedure. As such, this document  is
subject to change. USE AT YOUR OWN RISK! Because this is  an
unapproved draft, this document must not be utilized for any
conformance/compliance  purposes.   Permission   is   hereby
granted   for  IEEE  Standards  Committee  participants   to
reproduce this document for purposes of IEEE standardization
activities  only.  Prior  to  submitting  this  document  to
another     standards    development    organization     for
standardization  activities,  permission   must   first   be
obtained   from   the  Manager,  Standards   Licensing   and
Contracts,  IEEE  Standards  Activities  Department.   Other
entities  seeking permission to reproduce this document,  in
whole  or  in part, must obtain permission from the Manager,
Standards Licensing and Contracts, IEEE Standards Activities
Department
IEEE Standards Activities Department
Standards Licensing and Contracts
445 Hoes Lane, P.O. Box 1331
Piscataway, NJ 08855-1331, USA

1.   Overview
This  document  is  a  deliverable  of  the  Standard  Upper
Ontology  Working Group under P1600.1 of the IEEE. The  work
programme   to  develop  this  document  was   approved   by
Resolution 3 of this group.
  
  1.1. Purpose
The  purpose of this document is to support the  purpose  of
the  Standard Upper Ontology Working Group, as stated in the
Project Authorisation Request given in the References [1] by
providing principles, a process, and templates to enable the
efficient and effective development of deliverables for  the
Standard Upper Ontology Working Group.
  
  1.2. Intended Audience
The  intended  audience  for  this  document  is  those  who
participate  in  the Standard Upper Ontology Working  Group,
who  come  from  a  wide range of disciplinary  backgrounds,
levels of professional experiences, and areas of expertise.
  
  1.3. Scope
This  document applies to all deliverables of  the  Standard
Upper  Ontology Working Group that require approval  by  the
Standard Upper Ontology Working Group.
This includes:
-    Ontologies developed under the Standard Upper Ontology
     Working Group,
-    This document.
This excludes:
-    Deliverables of other standards bodies,
-    Discussions on the Standard Upper Ontology Working
Group e-mail lists.
  
  1.4. Requirements
The requirements for this document are:
1.    To  provide a process for the development of  Standard
  Upper Ontology Working Group project deliverables.
2.   The process should be as simple as possible.
3.   The documentation of the process should be clear and
unambiguous.
4.   The true status of project deliverables should be
transparent.
5.   The process should support the development of
deliverables that meet their stated requirements.

2.   References
[1]   Project  Authorisation Request for  P1600.1,  IEEE-SA,
  2000    available    from    the    internet    2003-11-19
  http://suo.ieee.org/PAR.pdf
[2]  IEEE Standards Style Manual, IEEE-SA, 2000 available
from the internet 2003-12-10
http://standards.ieee.org/guides/style/2000Style.pdf

3.   Definitions
This  annex provides definitions of terms that are important
to  this  document  or are used in a special  or  restricted
sense in this document. The definitions given are those that
shall be used in interpreting this document.
Definitions are given as phrases that can be substituted for
the   term  defined.  The  definitions  are  therefore   not
sentences,  and  do  not start with  a  capital  letter  and
definite or indefinite article or end with a full stop.
  
  3.1. Conformance
agreeing or corresponding in character or qualities
  Note: Taken   from  the  Oxford  English  Dictionary
        definition for congruous.
  
  3.2. Defect
cause of failure of a deliverable to meet its purpose
  
  3.3. Definition
precise statement of the essential nature of some thing
  Note: Taken from the Oxford English Dictionary.
  
  3.4. Deliverable
formal  product that is an objective of an approved Standard
Upper Ontology Working Group Work Programme
  Note: This  may include Draft Standards for approval
        by  the IEEE Standards Authority, work towards
        such standards, or internal documents for  the
        SUO WG, e.g. this document.
  
  3.5. Example
typical instance that illustrates a concept
  Note: Adapted from the Oxford English Dictionary.
  
  3.6. Formal Issue
alleged defect in a deliverable that has been identified and
documented according to the procedures in this document
  
  3.7. Informative
documentation  that  improves understanding,  but  to  which
conformance is not required
  
  3.8. Normative
Documentation  that sets out a standard  or  norm  to  which
conformance may be required
  
  3.9. Principle
general rule or law adopted as a guide to action
  Note: Taken from the Oxford English Dictionary.
  
  3.10.     Purpose
intended function
  
  3.11.     Intended Audience
those  to  whom the document is addressed and  who  need  to
understand it
  
  3.12.     Term
word or group of words expressing a notion
  Note: Taken from the Oxford English Dictionary.

4.   Fundamental Principles
The  process  defined  in  this document  is  based  on  the
principles   of  Quality  Management.  A  text  on   Quality
Management is given in the Bibliography [2].
In  Quality Management, quality is defined as being “fit for
purpose”.  If a deliverable is not fit for purpose  then  it
should  be  possible to identify defects in the  deliverable
whose removal will improve the quality.
The  phrase  'fit  for purpose' can lead to  differences  in
interpretation.  For the purposes of deliverables covered by
these guidelines a deliverable shall be considered 'fit  for
purpose'  if and only if it satisfies each and every  stated
and agreed requirement placed upon it.

5.   Process
  
  5.1. Stage 1 – Work Programme Approval
In  order  to  initiate  the process  of  approving  a  Work
Programme for the Standard Upper Ontology Working Group, the
proposers of the Work Programme shall submit a motion to the
Standard   Upper   Ontology  Working  Group   defining   the
objectives  of a Work Programme and including an outline  of
the deliverables of the Work Programme.
This motion shall include at least:
-    The objective of the Work Programme,
-    A statement of the purpose of each deliverable,
-    The intended audience for each deliverable,
-    The requirements that each deliverable shall meet to be
fit for purpose.
The  motion  shall  also include the nomination  of  a  Work
Programme Manager for the Work Programme.
The motion may also include:
-    reference to initial material, or deliverable material
     for any later stages of the process.
-    the nomination of additional roles within the work
programme, e.g. deliverable editor.
If   the   motion  is  passed  the  Work  Programme  becomes
authorised by the Standard Upper Ontology Working Group.
The  Standard  Upper  Ontology  Working  Group  Chair  shall
maintain  a publicly available and numbered list of  motions
that  pass  as  resolutions of the Standard  Upper  Ontology
Working Group.
  
  5.2. Stage 2 – Draft Material Development
Draft Material may be developed towards or in support of the
Work Programme deliverables. The Work Programme Manager  may
circulate  the Draft Material for comment at his discretion.
No  formal  vote  on  this  Draft  Material  is  taken,  but
interested  parties can raise formal issues (see  definition
in  3)  against  it.  It  is good practice  to  develop  and
maintain  a formal issues log, but at this stage it  is  not
required.
Anyone may raise formal issues by using the form in Annex A,
and  sending  them  to the Standard Upper  Ontology  Working
Group  e-mail list. The formal issue resolution  process  is
defined below in Clause 6.
  
  5.3. Stage 3 – Draft Deliverable Proposal
At  their  discretion the Work Programme Leader  may  submit
material for approval as a Draft Deliverable. A formal  vote
of  the  Standard Upper Ontology Working Group is undertaken
to determine approval. The following responses are allowed:
-    Abstain,
-    Yes,
-    Yes with comments,
-    No with comments,
Comments  are  made as formal issues raised as described  in
Clause 6.
“Yes  with comments” does not require the formal issues that
have  been  raised  to be resolved before  the  document  is
accepted  as a Deliverable. This is appropriate  when  there
are  editorial issues, or minor technical issues.  “No  with
comments” means that the document is not considered fit  for
purpose  as  a  deliverable, i.e. there are major  technical
issues  that need to be resolved. It does not mean that  the
voter  does not support the intent of the deliverable.  That
is decided when the Work Programme is approved.
Following the result of the vote, if the majority  of  those
voting,  vote  in  favour, the document is recognised  as  a
Draft Deliverable and passes to the next stage.
  
  5.4. Stage 4 – Deliverable Proposal
The  Work  Programme team processes the formal  issues  that
have  been  `raised  as  a result of the  Draft  Deliverable
ballot  and  then  the  Work Programme  Leader  submits  the
document   for  a  formal  vote  to  be  recognised   as   a
Deliverable.
The voting is as for a Draft Deliverable. The Deliverable is
passed if a majority vote “Yes” or “Yes with Comments”,  but
in  the  event that there are any “no with comments”  votes,
the  Work  Programme  Leader should consider  resolving  the
formal  issues and resubmitting the document for  a  further
vote.
  
  5.5. Stage 5 – Revision
A  Deliverable may have formal issues raised against it. The
Standard Upper Ontology Working Group Chair shall maintain a
log  of these Formal Issues. A Work Programme to resolve one
or more formal issues against a Deliverable may be proposed.

6.   Formal Issue Resolution Process
To  be  valid, a formal issue shall identify a defect  in  a
deliverable  of  the Standard Upper Ontology  Working  Group
that  detracts  from  the  deliverable  meeting  its  stated
purpose.  Where the deliverable is a document,  examples  of
defects include:
-    a spelling or grammar error,
-    an untrue statement,
-    an unclear, ambiguous or misleading statement,
-    something missing that is necessary.
Anyone  may  raise a formal issue against a  Standard  Upper
Ontology  Working Group deliverable. The  form  in  Annex  2
shall  be  used, together with the accompanying instructions
there for completion.
The  Work  Programme shall maintain a log of  formal  issues
raised  against the deliverable for a deliverable  that  has
reached Draft Deliverable level or beyond. The formal  issue
log shall be publicly available.
A  formal issue is resolved when the Work Programme and  the
formal issue owner agree that it is. In the first place  the
issue owner is the person who raised the issue. However,  it
may happen that a formal issue owner is unable to follow the
resolution of a formal issue he owns. In this case the  Work
Programme Leader shall seek a substitute formal issue owner.
If  no substitute formal issue owner can be found the formal
issue shall be considered to be withdrawn.
A formal issue is considered outstanding unless it is either
completed or withdrawn.

                              
                   Annex 1   Bibliography
[3]   Dale, Barrie G. Managing Quality, Blackell Publishers,
  2003 ISBN: 0631236147
                              
                           Annex 2
                              
                Formal issue Form (Normative)
This  annex defines the form that shall be used to  document
formal issues.
Issue No:
Formal issue Creator:
Formal issue Owner:
(if different from creator)
Date Raised:
Status:
Formal issue level:
Deliverable:
Clause:
Title:
Formal issue:

Proposed Resolution (optional):

Discussion:

Agreed Resolution (Work Programme and formal issue raiser):

Completion Date:

Field Definitions and Responsibilities

Issue No.
identifying serial number for the issue
Created by Work Programme Leader.

Formal Issue Creator
person who raises the formal issue
Created by Issue Creator.

Formal Issue Owner
person  who has taken ownership of the formal issue  in  the
absence of the creator.
Created by Work Programme Leader.

Date Raised
date   on   which   the  formal  issue  is   submitted   for
consideration
Created by Issue Creator.

Status
status representing progress in resolving the formal issue
Allowed values are:
Raised         The  formal  issue has been raised,  but  the
               Work  Programme has not yet responded to  the
               formal issue.
Accepted       The  formal issue has been accepted as  valid
               by  the Work Programme, but no resolution has
               been  identified and agreed with  the  formal
               issue raiser.
Rejected       The formal issue has not been accepted by the
               Work Programme. A reason must be given.
Withdrawn      The  formal issue has been withdrawn  by  the
               formal issue raiser.
Resolved       The  resolution to the formal issue has  been
               agreed  in  principle  by  the  formal  issue
               raiser and the Work Programme. The resolution
               is  documented in the formal issue  log,  but
               has not yet been reflected in the document.
Completed      The   resolution  of  the  formal  issue   is
               reflected in the document to which it refers.
Created by Work Programme Leader.

Formal Issue Level
significance of a defect with respect to the purpose of  the
deliverable
A  formal issue has an importance level that is one  of  the
following values:
Editorial      A  defect  that does not affect the technical
               performance  of  the document  and  does  not
               affect  its  comprehension. Examples  include
               spelling, grammar, or layout.
Minor Technical      A  defect that is technical in  nature,
               but  is  easy to fix. Examples include errors
               in    construction    of   formal    language
               statements.
Major Technical      A  defect where the scale and impact of
               the  defect  may require significant  thought
               and  work. Examples include axioms stated  in
               such a way that they do not have the intended
               effect, and missing material.
Created by Issue Creator.

Deliverable
name of the deliverable on which the issue is raised
Created by Issue Creator.

Clause
clause number and other indication of where the issue occurs
Created by Issue Creator.

Title
title for the issue
Created by Issue Creator.

Formal Issue
statement of the issue
This  should  identify the defect, and how it  prevents  the
deliverable from meeting its purpose.
Created by Issue Creator.

Proposed Resolution
proposed change to the deliverable that would eliminate  the
defect
Created by Issue Creator.

Discussion
documentation of considerations that lead to a resolution
Created by Work Programme Leader.

Agreed Resolution
action  to  be  taken  to resolve agreed  between  the  Work
Programme  Leader for the deliverable and the  Formal  Issue
Owner
Created by Work Programme Leader.

Completion Date
date on which the Agreed Resolution is incorporated into the
deliverable
Created by Work Programme Leader.
                              
                           Annex 3
                              
           Documentation Requirements (Normative)

Introduction
This  Annex  presents  minimum requirements  that  documents
shall meet in order to facilitate their development.
Draft  Standards should conform to the “IEEE Standards Style
Manual” [2].

Required Contents
Documents shall include the following contents:
1.   Title,
2.   Version,
3.   Status (approval stage as defined in this document)
4.   Editor name,
5.   A copyright statement,
6.   An overview
7.   An introduction that includes:
-    Boilerplate text that explains that the Standard Upper
     Ontology Working Group under IEEE P1600.1 developed this
     deliverable, and the resolution number that approved the
     work programme,
-    The purpose,
-    The intended audience,
-    The requirements to be met by the deliverable.
8.    Normative  references (to standards  whose  provisions
  also form part of this deliverable),
9.   Bibliography.

Normative and Informative Text
A  standard  may  include normative  and  informative  text.
Clauses  in  the  body of the standard are normative  except
for:
-    Notes, introduced by the word “Note:”
-    Examples, introduced by the word “Example:” or “e.g.”
Notes and examples may be numbered.
In  addition to Clauses in the body of the document, it  may
have   Annexes.   Annexes  may  be   either   normative   or
informative,  and this shall be stated in the title  of  the
annex.
