                            
Standard Upper Ontology Working Group Policy and Code of
 Practice for e-mail Lists and Internet based Resources
                  Editor: Matthew West
                   Version 1.0 Draft 1

1.   Introduction

1.1. Purpose
The Standard Upper Ontology Working Group (SUO WG) meets
and conducts its business using the Internet rather than
through face-to-face meetings. The work is facilitated
through the use of e-mail lists and other Internet based
resources such as web pages
This document defines the Policy and Code of Practice of
the SUO WG in setting up, administering, and controlling
the use of the e-mail lists and other Internet based
resources used to conduct its business.

1.2. Intended Audience
The intended audience for this document is all those who
are members of any e-mail list of the SUO WG.

2.   Policy
The SUO WG shall set up e-mail lists to support the work
of the SUO WG. All e-mail lists of the SUO WG shall have
an archive accessible from the Web. There shall be one
general list where the main business of the SUO WG is
conducted. Other e-mail lists may be set up to support
projects or minority interests when the volume of e-mail
warrants this, both to avoid receipt of unwanted e-mail
and to help organising material in the archives.
The SUO WG shall establish and maintain web pages to
publish and promote the work of the SUO WG. These shall
include:
  -    The aims and objectives of the SUO WG,
-    All formal documents of the SUO WG (e.g. PAR, policy
and procedures, drafts and deliverables of approved Work
Programmes, issue logs)
-    Support for the development of approved Work
Programmes,
-    Support for members contributions.

3.   Code of Practice for e-mail Lists

3.1. Responsibilities of e-mail List Members

Volume
For each list to which they subscribe, members shall
restrict themselves to 5 postings per day.

Relevance
Postings shall be relevant to the purpose of the list to
which they are sent. The larger the number of posting by
an individual, the greater care should be taken to ensure
relevance. Those who post on average less than two e-
mails per week are allowed latitude in the relevance of
their posting.

Respect for other Members
In conducting themselves on the SUO WG e-mail lists
members shall:
  -    Treat other members with respect,
-    Strive for consensus without eliminating the
minority voice,
-    Listen to the point of view of others.
Postings shall not be abusive or contain foul language.

Consideration for other members – Literary Style
The purpose of postings to the SUO e-mail lists is to
communicate with other list members. Those posting
messages shall therefore consider their audience in
drafting their postings.
  -    Postings shall be reasonably concise so that the
     content is not obscured.
-    Postings shall be complete, rather than end in mid
thought.
-    Postings shall be clear and unambiguous, to
accurately convey the message and to avoid unnecessary
clarification.
-    Postings shall use language that reflects that many
members do not have English as a first language (i.e.
avoid colloquialisms).

Content
The e-mail lists may be used to:
  -    Propose a motion,
-    Make a brief exposition of some point or principle,
-    Ask a question,
-    Make communications directly related to an approved
Work Programme,
-    Bring to the attention of members some external
material or event,
-    Respond to another posting.
Substantial contributions (more than 2-3 pages) shall be
made by publishing the material on the web and sending a
message to the relevant e-mail list to notify of the
material.

3.2. Remedies
In the event of a posting not complying with this Code of
Practice, a member may write to the list to point out the
nature of the non-compliance. The member accused of non-
compliance may apologise or defend his posting. If the
complaining member does not accept the defence, then they
may call for a vote to determine whether the post was non-
compliant. If a member consistently fails to comply with
the Code of Practice then the Chair shall give them a
formal warning. If the member still consistently fails to
comply then the Chair shall propose a motion for the
offending member to be excluded from the list.

4.   Code of Practice for SUO Web Content
Members may request the Chair to post web pages in a
member’s area of the SUO web site. This shall not be
refused unreasonably.

4.1. Responsibilities
Responsibilities of those providing web pages include:
  -    Material that is posted should be broadly relevant
     to the work of the SUO WG, but this should be interpreted
     generously.
-    Material posted is the responsibility of the member
posting it.
-    Material posted shall be respectful of others and
not include foul or abusive language.

4.2. Remedies
In the event of non-compliance with the Code of Practice
for Web Content by a member, any member may post a
complaint to the SUO list. If non-compliance is confirmed
– if necessary by a vote of the SUO WG voting members –
then the offending material shall be removed from the
member’s area. Revised material may be proposed for
posting by the author.
