2004-01-10                                  Page 12 of 12
                              
Standard Upper Ontology Working Group Development Guidelines
                       Version 1.0 D6
               Status: Stage 2: Draft Material
                      Date: 2004-01-10
                    Editor: Matthew West
Copyright © 2004 by the Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers, Inc.
Three Park Avenue
New York, NY 10016-5997, USA
All rights reserved.
This  document  is an unapproved draft of  a  proposed  IEEE
Standard Working Group procedure. As such, this document  is
subject to change. USE AT YOUR OWN RISK! Because this is  an
unapproved draft, this document must not be utilized for any
conformance/compliance  purposes.   Permission   is   hereby
granted   for  IEEE  Standards  Committee  participants   to
reproduce this document for purposes of IEEE standardization
activities  only.  Prior  to  submitting  this  document  to
another     standards    development    organization     for
standardization  activities,  permission   must   first   be
obtained   from   the  Manager,  Standards   Licensing   and
Contracts,  IEEE  Standards  Activities  Department.   Other
entities  seeking permission to reproduce this document,  in
whole  or  in part, must obtain permission from the Manager,
Standards Licensing and Contracts, IEEE Standards Activities
Department
IEEE Standards Activities Department
Standards Licensing and Contracts
445 Hoes Lane, P.O. Box 1331
Piscataway, NJ 08855-1331, USA

1    Overview
This  document  is  a  deliverable  of  the  Standard  Upper
Ontology  Working Group under P1600.1 of the IEEE. The  work
to  develop  this document was approved by Resolution  3  of
this group.

1.1  Purpose
The  purpose of this document is to support the  purpose  of
the  Standard Upper Ontology Working Group, as stated in the
Project Authorisation Request given in the References [1] by
providing principles, a process, and templates to enable the
efficient and effective development of deliverables for  the
Standard Upper Ontology Working Group.

1.2  Intended Audience
The  intended  audience  for  this  document  is  those  who
participate  in  the Standard Upper Ontology Working  Group,
who  come  from  a  wide range of disciplinary  backgrounds,
levels of professional experiences, and areas of expertise.

1.3  Scope
This  document applies to all deliverables of  the  Standard
Upper  Ontology Working Group that require approval  by  the
Standard Upper Ontology Working Group.
This includes:
  -    Ontologies developed under the Standard Upper Ontology
     Working Group,
-    This document.
This excludes:
  -    Deliverables of other standards bodies,
-    Discussions on the Standard Upper Ontology Working
Group e-mail lists.

1.4  Requirements
The requirements for this document are:
1.    To  provide a process for the development of  Standard
  Upper Ontology Working Group project deliverables.
2.   The process should be as simple as possible.
3.   The documentation of the process should be clear and
unambiguous.
4.   The true status of project deliverables should be
transparent.
5.   The process should support the development of
deliverables that meet their stated requirements.

2    References
[1]   Project  Authorisation Request for  P1600.1,  IEEE-SA,
  2000    available    from    the    internet    2003-11-19
  http://suo.ieee.org/PAR.pdf
[2]  IEEE Standards Style Manual, IEEE-SA, 2000 available
from the internet 2003-12-10
http://standards.ieee.org/guides/style/2000Style.pdf
[3]  ISO 9000:2000, Quality management systems —
Fundamentals and vocabulary
[4]  ISO/IEC Directives, Part 2, 2001
[5]  ISO/IEC Guide 2, 1996

3    Definitions
This clause provides definitions of terms that are important
to  this  document  or are used in a special  or  restricted
sense in this document. The definitions given are those that
shall be used in interpreting this document.
Definitions are given as phrases that can be substituted for
the   term  defined.  The  definitions  are  therefore   not
sentences,  and  do  not start with  a  capital  letter  and
definite or indefinite article or end with a full stop.

3.1  Defect
non-fulfilment  of  a  requirement (3.10.1)  related  to  an
intended or specified use
[ISO 9000:2000, definition 3.6.3]

3.2  Definition
precise statement of the essential nature of some thing
  Note: Taken from the Oxford English Dictionary.

3.3  Deliverable
formal  product  of  work approved by a  resolution  of  the
Standard Upper Ontology Working Group
  Note: This  may include Draft Standards for approval
        by  the IEEE Standards Authority, work towards
        such standards, or internal documents for  the
        SUO WG, e.g. this document.

3.4  Example
typical instance that illustrates a concept
  Note: Adapted from the Oxford English Dictionary.

3.5  Formal Issue
alleged defect in a deliverable that has been identified and
documented according to the procedures in this document

3.6  Informative Elements
documentation  that  improves understanding,  but  to  which
conformance is not required
[ISO/IEC Directives, Part 2, 2001, definition 3.7]

3.6.1     preliminary elements
elements  that identify the document, introduce its  content
and   explain  its  background,  its  development  and   its
relationship with other documents
[ISO/IEC Directives, Part 2, 2001, definition 3.7.1]

3.6.2     supplementary elements
elements  that  provide additional information  intended  to
assist the understanding or use of the document
[ISO/IEC Directives, Part 2, 2001, definition 3.7.2]

3.6.3     required element
element the presence of which in a document is obligatory
[ISO/IEC Directives, Part 2, 2001, definition 3.7.3]

3.6.4     optional element
element the presence of which in a document is dependent  on
the provisions of the particular document
[ISO/IEC Directives, Part 2, 2001, definition 3.7.4]

3.7  Intended Audience
those  to  whom the document is addressed and  who  need  to
understand it

3.8  Normative Elements
elements that describe the scope of the document, and  which
set out provisions
[ISO/IEC Directives, Part 2, 2001, definition 3.6]

3.9  Principle
general rule or law adopted as a guide to action
  Note: Taken from the Oxford English Dictionary.

3.10 Provisions

3.10.1    Requirement (expressed in a standard)
expression  in the content of a document conveying  criteria
to  be  fulfilled if compliance with the document is  to  be
claimed and from which no deviation is permitted
[ISO/IEC Directives, Part 2, 2001, definition 3.10.1]

3.10.2    recommendation
expression in the content of a document conveying that among
several  possibilities  one is recommended  as  particularly
suitable, without mentioning or excluding others, or that  a
certain  course  of action is preferred but not  necessarily
required,   or  that  (in  the  negative  form)  a   certain
possibility  or  course  of action  is  deprecated  but  not
prohibited
[ISO/IEC Directives, Part 2, 2001, definition 3.10.1]

3.10.3    statement
expression   in   the   content  of  a  document   conveying
information
[ISO/IEC Directives, Part 2, 2001, definition 3.10.1]

3.11 Purpose
intended function

3.12 Requirement (of the deliverable, rather than in it)
need  or  expectation that is stated, generally  implied  or
obligatory
  NOTE 1  “Generally implied” means that it is  custom
        or   common   practice  that   the   need   or
        expectation under consideration is implied.
  NOTE 2  A qualifier can be used to denote a specific
        type of requirement, e.g. product requirement,
        quality   management   requirement,   customer
        requirement.
  NOTE 3  A  specified  requirement is  one  which  is
        stated, for example, in a document.
  NOTE 4  Requirements can be generated  by  different
        interested parties.
[ISO 9000:2000, definition 3.1.2]

3.13 Standard
document,  established  by  consensus  and  approved  by   a
recognized body, that provides, for common and repeated use,
rules, guidelines or characteristics for activities or their
results,  aimed at the achievement of the optimum degree  of
order in a given context
  NOTE  Standards  should be based on the consolidated
        results of science, technology and experience,
        and   aimed   at  the  promotion  of   optimum
        community benefits.
[ISO/IEC Guide 2:1996, definition 3.2]

4    Fundamental Principles
The  process  defined  in  this document  is  based  on  the
principles   of  Quality  Management.  A  text  on   Quality
Management  is given in the Bibliography [1]. This  document
defines a very basic Quality Management System as defined in
ISO 9000 [3].
In  Quality Management, quality is defined as being “fit for
purpose”.  If a deliverable is not fit for purpose  then  it
should  be  possible to identify defects in the  deliverable
whose removal will improve the quality.
The  phrase  'fit  for purpose' can lead to  differences  in
interpretation.  For the purposes of deliverables covered by
these guidelines a deliverable shall be considered 'fit  for
purpose'  if and only if it satisfies each and every  stated
and agreed requirement placed upon it.

5    Process
All  voting  shall  be  undertaken through  the  process  of
proposing  and  voting on a motion. The  counting  of  votes
shall  be by whatever process is determined for the  passing
of motions in the SUO WG from time to time.
When  a  vote is not passed, the stage shall be repeated  or
the work terminated.

5.1  Stage 1 –Approval
In  order to initiate the process of approving work  towards
developing the Standard Upper Ontology, the proposers  shall
submit a motion to the Standard Upper Ontology Working Group
defining the objectives of the work and including an outline
of the deliverables.
This motion shall include at least:
  -    The objective of the work,
-    A statement of the purpose of each deliverable,
-    The intended audience for each deliverable,
-    The requirements that each deliverable shall meet to be
fit for purpose.
The  motion shall also include the nomination of  a  Manager
for the work.
The motion may also include:
  -    reference to initial material, or deliverable material
     for any later stages of the process.
-    the nomination of additional roles to perform the work,
e.g. deliverable editor.
If  the motion is passed the work becomes authorised by  the
Standard Upper Ontology Working Group.
  Note: The motions for existing starter documents are
        considered here to be Approval motions.
The  Standard  Upper  Ontology  Working  Group  Chair  shall
maintain  a publicly available and numbered list of  motions
that  pass  as  resolutions of the Standard  Upper  Ontology
Working Group.

5.2  Stage 2 – Draft Material Development
Draft Material may be developed towards or in support of the
deliverables.  The Manager may circulate the Draft  Material
for  comment at his discretion. No formal vote on this Draft
Material  is taken, but interested parties can make informal
comments  or  raise  formal issues  (see  definition  in  3)
against it. A log of issues raised formally shall be kept by
the manager.
  Note: The  work  that  has been done  on  developing
        existing  starter documents is  considered  in
        this document to fall within this stage.
Anyone may raise formal issues by using the form in Annex A,
and  sending  them  to the Standard Upper  Ontology  Working
Group  e-mail list. The formal issue resolution  process  is
defined below in Clause 6.

5.3  Stage 3 – Draft Deliverable Proposal
At  their  discretion the Work Programme Leader  may  submit
material for approval as a Draft Deliverable. A formal  vote
of  the  Standard Upper Ontology Working Group is undertaken
to   determine   approval.  The  following   responses   are
permitted:
  -    Abstain,
-    Yes,
-    Yes with comments,
-    No with comments,
Comments  are  made as formal issues raised as described  in
Clause 6.
“Yes  with comments” does not require the formal issues that
have  been  raised  to be resolved before  the  document  is
accepted  as a Deliverable. This is appropriate  when  there
are  editorial issues, or minor technical issues.  “No  with
comments” means that the document is not considered fit  for
purpose  as  a  deliverable, i.e. there are major  technical
issues  that need to be resolved. It does not mean that  the
voter  does not support the intent of the deliverable.  That
is decided when the Work Programme is approved.
Following the result of the vote, if the majority  of  those
voting,  vote  in  favour, the document is recognised  as  a
Draft Deliverable and passes to the next stage.

5.4  Stage 4 – Deliverable Proposal
The  Work  Programme team processes the formal  issues  that
have been raised as a result of the Draft Deliverable ballot
and  then the Work Programme Leader submits the document for
a formal vote to be recognised as a Deliverable.
The voting is as for a Draft Deliverable. The Deliverable is
passed if a majority vote “Yes” or “Yes with Comments”,  but
in  the  event that there are any “no with comments”  votes,
the  Manager should consider resolving the formal issues and
resubmitting the document for a further vote.
If  the deliverable is a draft standard, then at this  stage
it is submitted to the IEEE SA for their consideration.

5.5  Stage 5 – Revision
A  Deliverable may have formal issues raised against it. The
Standard Upper Ontology Working Group Chair shall maintain a
log  of these Formal Issues. A Work Programme to resolve one
or more formal issues against a Deliverable may be proposed.

6    Formal Issue Resolution Process
To  be  valid, a formal issue shall identify a defect  in  a
deliverable  of  the Standard Upper Ontology  Working  Group
that  detracts  from  the  deliverable  meeting  its  stated
purpose.  Where the deliverable is a document,  examples  of
defects include:
  -    a spelling or grammar error,
-    an untrue statement,
-    an unclear, ambiguous or misleading statement or
passage,
-    something missing that is necessary.
Anyone  may  raise a formal issue against a  Standard  Upper
Ontology  Working Group deliverable. The  form  in  Annex  2
shall  be  used, together with the accompanying instructions
there for completion.
The  Manager  shall maintain a log of formal  issues  raised
against  the  deliverable. The formal  issue  log  shall  be
publicly available.
A  formal issue is resolved when the Manager and the  formal
issue  owner agree that it is. In the first place the  issue
owner  is the person who raised the issue. However,  it  may
happen  that  a formal issue owner is unable to  follow  the
resolution  of  a  formal issue he owns. In  this  case  the
Manager  shall seek a substitute formal issue owner.  If  no
substitute formal issue owner can be found the formal  issue
shall be considered to be withdrawn.
A formal issue is considered outstanding unless it is either
completed or withdrawn.

                              
                        Bibliography
[1]  Dale, Barrie G. Managing Quality, Blackwell Publishers,
  2003 ISBN: 0631236147
                              
                Formal issue Form (Normative)
This  annex defines the form that shall be used to  document
formal issues.
Issue No:
Formal issue Creator:
Formal issue Owner:
(if different from creator)
Date Raised:
Status:
Formal issue level:
Deliverable:
Clause:
Title:
Formal issue:

Proposed Resolution (optional):

Discussion:

Agreed Resolution (Work Programme and formal issue raiser):

Completion Date:

Field Definitions and Responsibilities

Issue No.
identifying serial number for the issue
Created by Work Programme Leader.

Formal Issue Creator
person who raises the formal issue
Created by Issue Creator.

Formal Issue Owner
person  who has taken ownership of the formal issue  in  the
absence of the creator.
Created by Work Programme Leader.

Date Raised
date   on   which   the  formal  issue  is   submitted   for
consideration
Created by Issue Creator.

Status
status representing progress in resolving the formal issue
Allowed values are:
Raised         The formal issue has been raised, but not yet
               responded to.
Accepted       The  formal issue has been accepted as valid,
               but  no  resolution has been  identified  and
               agreed with the formal issue raiser/owner.
Rejected       The  formal  issue has not been  accepted.  A
               reason must be given.
Withdrawn      The  formal issue has been withdrawn  by  the
               formal issue raiser/owner.
Resolved       The  resolution to the formal issue has  been
               agreed  in  principle with the  formal  issue
               raiser. The resolution is documented  in  the
               formal  issue  log,  but  has  not  yet  been
               reflected in the deliverable.
Completed      The   resolution  of  the  formal  issue   is
               reflected  in  the deliverable  to  which  it
               refers.
Created by the Manager.

Formal Issue Level
significance of a defect with respect to the purpose of  the
deliverable
A  formal issue has an importance level that is one  of  the
following values:
Editorial      A  defect  that does not affect the technical
               performance  of  the document  and  does  not
               affect  its  comprehension. Examples  include
               spelling, grammar, or layout.
Minor Technical     A defect that is technical in nature but
               has a small impact on the deliverable meeting
               its purpose.
Major Technical      A  defect where the scale and impact of
               the defect mean that the deliverable will not
               be  able  to  meet  its purpose  without  the
               defect   being  remedied.  Examples   include
               axioms stated in such a way that they do  not
               have   the   intended  effect,  and   missing
               material.
Created by Issue Creator.

Deliverable
name of the deliverable on which the issue is raised
Created by Issue Creator.

Clause
clause number and other indication of where the issue occurs
  Example:    Examples  of “other indication”  include
        figure number, note number, example number and
        paragraph number.
Created by Issue Creator.

Title
title for the issue
Created by Issue Creator.

Formal Issue
statement of the issue
This  should  identify the defect, and how it  prevents  the
deliverable from meeting its purpose.
Created by Issue Creator.

Proposed Resolution
proposed change to the deliverable that would eliminate  the
defect
Created by Issue Creator.

Discussion
documentation of considerations that lead to a resolution
Created by Manager.

Agreed Resolution
action to be taken to resolve agreed between the Manager for
the deliverable and the Formal Issue Owner
Created by the Manager.

Completion Date
date on which the Agreed Resolution is incorporated into the
deliverable
Created by Manager.
                              
           Documentation Requirements (Normative)

Introduction
This  Annex  presents  minimum requirements  that  documents
shall meet in order to facilitate their development.
Draft  Standards should conform to the “IEEE Standards Style
Manual” [2].

Required Contents
Documents shall include the following contents:
1.   Title,
2.   Version,
3.   Status (approval stage as defined in this document)
4.   Editor name,
5.   A copyright statement,
6.   An overview
7.   An introduction that includes:
  -    Boilerplate text that explains that the Standard Upper
     Ontology Working Group under IEEE P1600.1 developed this
     deliverable, and the resolution number that approved the
     work programme,
-    The purpose,
-    The intended audience,
-    The requirements to be met by the deliverable.
8.    Normative  references (to standards  whose  provisions
  also form part of this deliverable),
9.   Bibliography.

Normative and Informative Elements
A standard may include normative and informative elements in
Clauses  and  Annexes. It shall be clearly  indicated  which
Clauses and Annexes are normative and which informative.
Informative material in normative Clauses or annexes may  be
included through:
  -    Notes, introduced by the word “Note:”
-    Examples, introduced by the word “Example:” or “e.g.”
Notes and examples may be numbered.
